# The `idx` Tag

## What About Memory?

So we can declare the shape of user input using a struct. But what if I'm a
sucker for memory performance? If we must declare the fields of an input struct
in the order by which we want them displayed to users, we may face a tradeoff in
the form of a suboptimal memory layout on that struct.

See, for example, our `applicationForm` struct from the example(s). Imagine if we
wanted to display another bool-type option, `ConsentToSMS`, after the `PhoneNo`
field, but before the `Country` field. Because struct fields in Go sit in
memory within a contiguous block, we end up with needless padding in two places,
generated by Go for the sake of making each field easily addressable by the CPU:

```go
// assume we're on a 64-bit system for this example
type applicationForm struct {
  // ...
  PhoneNo          int
  ConsentToSMS     bool   // 1 byte
  // [ PADDING ]          // 7 bytes
  Country          string
  // ...
  CanTravel        bool   // 1 byte
  // [ PADDING ]          // 7 bytes
  CoverLetter string
}
```

Go is adding 7 bytes of padding after each boolean-type struct field
by design, but we know that were we to pair those boolean fields together
(preferably at the end of the struct), our memory layout would be far more
optimal: Go would be adding 6 bytes of padding, rather than 14! Yet, because
of our selfish desire for a more sensible user form that asks for a user's
consent to receive SMS text messages _after_ inquiring about their phone number,
we end up wasting a total of 8 precious bytes!

Is there anyone who could help us?

Enter the `idx` tag! This tag allows us to declare our struct fields in whatever
more memory-performant way we desire, while telling `structly`'s bubbletea
model what order we actually want to display them in.

```go
// applicationForm holds fields typical of a job application.
type applicationForm struct {
 FirstName        string `idx:"0"`
 LastName         string `idx:"1"`
 Email            string `idx:"2"`
 Country          string `idx:"5"`
 Location         string `idx:"6"`
 CoverLetter      string `idx:"8"`
 PhoneNo          int    `idx:"3"`
 ConsentToSMS     bool   `idx:"4"`
 CanTravel        bool   `idx:"7"`
}
```

Sure, the order of display may become a bit less readable at a glance by us
developers within the source code, but we'll have to accept _some_ tradeoff
in the end, right? It's just nice to be able to choose which tradeoff we're
willing to accept.

The rules to using the `idx` tag are strict, but simple:

- **All or Nothing**: if you use it on one field, use it on all fields.
  - The exception here being on fields with the **incompatible** `bl` tag.
- **Start at 0**: the values must start at 0
- **Keep sequence**: the values must not break sequence.
  - No values may be skipped.
  - No two values may be the same.

To observe the `idx` tag in action, run the example at `./example/withIDX/main.go`!
You'll find that it has the same behavior as seen in the `default` example,
despite the reordered fields under the `applicationForm` struct.

This is the power of the `idx` tag!

You can also see a demonstration of just the behavior itself by running the
subtest under [idx_test.go](/menu/idx_test.go) dedicated to that using the following command in
your terminal:

```bash
go test -run TestIDXMemoryLayout -v
```

## What's Next?

Now that you've been introduced to the `idx` tag, you ought to know about its
interoperability with the `bl` tag, which is used for blacklisting fields action
the type level.

[Read about Field Exceptions](/examples/exceptions)
